- [Instructor] Hi, and
welcome back to the programme.
In this video, we're
going to look at loops.
So the first thing I'm going to do
is create a new file
and save it as loops.py.
In the past, we've looked at variables,
such as my_variable, and
that is the word hello,
for example.
And I've also spoken about how Python
doesn't know that this is a
word, or a phrase, or anything.
All it knows is that there's the letter h,
followed by e, followed by l,
followed by l, followed by o.
So surely if Python knows
that this is a sequence of letters,
we should be able to access
that as a sequence too.
So we should be able to
access each of the characters.
And indeed, just as we could with a list,
we can do things like
print(my_variable[0]).
And what happens when we do this
is that the first element
gets printed out, the h.
So let's go to the
Terminal and run this file.
And as you can see,
the h gets printed out.
This may remind you of this syntax we used
to access the first element of a list,
that we did in the last video,
or the last couple of videos.
So what if we wanted to print
out every letter of this word.
Well, easy enough.
We do this, and then
one, two, three, four.
There are five letters here,
so we start at zero and end up in four,
and we print them all out, right?
Fair enough.
However, let me tell you that
this is not very good code,
because there are many things
repeated over and over,
and it just doesn't really,
generally look very nice.
And also, if we increase
the size of this string
well, we have to just add more lines,
really, to print everything out.
Not very good.
So instead, what we can
do is we can iterate.
We can go over each of the
characters in the string.
So what we'll do is we'll say
for character in my_string:
print(character)
So this is a very common construct.
It's called a for loop.
And basically what happens is
we say character is a new variable,
and the first time we
run this line of code,
character is going to be
equal to the first element
of this variable my_string, the h.
Then we're going to run the
body of this loop which,
as you know, is indented
because there's a colon there.
And then after we run the
body, we're going to repeat.
But the character is now going to be
the second character, the e.
And then we're going to run the body,
and then we're going to repeat,
but then it's going to be the l.
And so on.
So character is just another variable
that gets assigned to each of
the elements of this variable.
My_string is called an iterable,
and you can do this iteration,
you can go over each of the
elements of any iterable.
And iterables are strings,
lists, sets, tuples, and more.
So you can do this thing here
for string, lists, sets,
tuples, and a few more things.
Okay, so let's run that, really.
And of course, we get an error because,
my bad, this is not called my_string,
it's called my_variable, of course.
So let's run that again,
and you can see we get h, e, l, l, o.
It's a very common mistake,
but you can see that we got
a Traceback, just as usual.
And we got a NameError saying
that the name my_string
was not defined, as it
happens all the time, really.
So nothing to worry about there.
Do notice that this makes sense
it makes sense to say
for each of the characters
in my_variable, do something.
But it doesn't have to
be called character.
It can be called asdfasdf.
It can be called anything you want.
And this is the variable
that is going to keep track
of each of the elements.
It doesn't have to have a sensible name,
it's just a variable.
Okay, so we've mentioned
that other things are also iterables,
so we can do something like
my_list is going to be [1, 3, 5, 7, 9],
and then we can iterate over this list
for number in my_list.
Notice how, after the
colon, as always, we indent.
And we're going to print(number ** 2).
And I'll use this opportunity
to let you know what ** is.
Maybe not something you'll use too often,
but nevertheless something
specific to Python.
And what that means is
multiply to the power of 2.
So what we're going to be
printing is 1 to the power of 2,
3 to the power of 2, 5 to
the power of 2, and so on.
So let's run this,
and what do you think
is going to come out?
Testing your math here.
And you knew it, we get hello first,
then 1, 9, 25, 49, 81.
Nothing new there.
So we've looked at the for loop.
And the for loop is this construct
that lets us iterate over an iterable.
Let's us run something
a number of times equivalent
to the length of the list,
or the length of the string.
And the variable, number,
is each of the elements of that iterable.
However, there's also
another type of loop.
A loop that we can run
while something is true.
So for example, say we ask the user,
"Do you want to print the number 10?"
And they'll say, "Yes,"
and then we can print the number 10 out.
And then we can ask them again
if they want to print it,
and they'll say, "Yes," and
then we can print it again.
And then we can ask them again, and so on.
The crux there is that
we're printing the number 10
while the user wants us to print it,
and as soon as they want
to stop, then we can stop.
So user_wants_number is
going to be equal to True.
And then we're going to say
while user_wants_number is equal to True.
And notice that it is a double equal sign.
So what we're saying is,
while the user_wants_number
is exactly equal to True,
and this is different
from the single equal,
because here we're not
changing the value of this,
we're just comparing it.
So we're going to compare
user_wants_number to True,
we're going to say print(10).
So if we run this, what do you
think is going to come out?
Maybe you should run this
in your computers as well,
although that may be a bit risky.
It's still printing out.
And it will keep printing out,
essentially forever, the number 10.
Why? Why does it print it constantly?
Well, we've not told it otherwise, really.
We've set a variable to be True,
and then while that variable
was True we're printing,
and really it's never stopping.
It's never not True, so
it keeps printing it out.
Notice how True is orange,
just like the numbers,
because it's a special Python keyword.
However, we can set
user_wants_number to be False,
which is the opposite of True,
and then this will no
longer be True essentially,
and then it will stop.
So what do you think is
going to get printed out now?
Nothing?
Well, we get a bit of gibberish there:
hello, 1, 9, 25, 49, 81, which
is this my_list printing,
and then we get 10, which is our 10 there.
I'm going to, for our benefit,
comment those things out,
and then save it and run it again,
and we'll just get our 10.
Okay, so let's actually ask the user
if they want to stop or continue.
So what we're going to
do is we're going to say
user_input = input("Should
we print again? (y/n) ")
So what is this?
What's this input thing?
This is new.
It is new.
What we're going to do now is
we're going to print this to the screen.
This is a parameter.
Parameter to the input method.
And the input method is
going to print this out,
and it's going to wait for
us to write something back.
So after this gets printed out,
we're going to be able to write something,
and whatever we write
is going to go into this
user_input variable.
And then we're going to
say if user_input is 'n',
then user_wants_number is False.
So what happens here is
we've got another thing,
which I'm going to look
at in the next video,
which is an if statement,
and the if just allows us to do something
if this comparison here is True.
So if we write the character 'n',
then this will be 'n'.
'n' is exactly equal to 'n',
so we will set this to be False,
and then we won't run this any longer.
But if we enter anything
else that is not 'n',
then this code here will not run,
so we will not set
user_wants_number to False,
and therefore we will run the loop again,
and we will ask the user again, and so on.
Let's run this, just so we
have a bit of an example.
But when we run it, we're
actually going to get an error
that we have not created.
So let's run this first, and
I'll explain what the error is.
So the first thing we get is 10,
because user_wants_number is True,
so the first thing we do is print 10.
And then, we get this
Should we print again? (y/n)
If we put n, then this if
statement should be True,
and we should change the
value of user_wants_number.
So let's do that, let's type n.
And then we get an error.
What's this?
Well, I don't know if you
guys remember from before,
but we encountered an error
that said, essentially,
NameError: name 'n' is not defined
And that was at the beginning,
when we called a variable the wrong thing.
Basically the variable didn't exist.
So what this is saying is
the variable n doesn't exist.
This doesn't make sense.
Surely we want 'n' to go into user_input.
And that's because input is
not the right method to use.
And that is because if
you type python --version
you can see that I am running Python 2.7
If you're running a Mac, you
will have the same problem.
Python, as a command,
is always Python 2.7,
so you have to run python3.5,
as I have mentioned
earlier, and then loops.py
So now we will work.
And when we type n, we
just stop the programme.
If we run that, but we type
y, then we do it again,
and again, and again until we stop.
So just an important bit of information.
If things are going wrong
that you think should be going right,
maybe check the version.
Make sure you're running Python 3.5.
And you can run Python 3.5 like that,
as we have seen in the past.
And just make sure to do that,
because these two are some key differences
between Python 2.7 and Python 3.5.
In this video we've looked at iterables,
which are strings, lists,
sets, tuples, and a few others.
And we'll get to those later on.
We've looked at the for loop,
which lets us iterate
over each of the elements of an iterable.
And we've also looked at the while loop.
We've also looked at
what True and False are.
And we've looked that
we can make comparisons
between values by using
the double equals sign.
We've also looked at the input method,
which lets us retrieve
some input from the user,
as long as they're running Python 3.5.
And we've also looked at the if statement,
which lets us execute something
if this thing here after
the if evaluates to True.
So basically if this
variable here contains 'n'.
A lot of things to be looking at.
Please do download this code
that is linked in the resources.
You can download this code
and have a wee look again,
have a play with it, and then
move on to the next video.
So I'm really excited to see you there.